CHAPTER XXXIV and XXXV.
When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself as much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment the examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since being in Kent.
They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering, but in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that cheerfulness which had been used to characterize her style, and which, proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself, and kindly disposed towards every one, had been scarcely ever clouded.
Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness with an attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal.
Mr. Darcy's shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict gave her a keener sense of her sister's sufferings.
It was some consolation to think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next, and, a still greater, that in less than a fortnight she should herself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her spirits by all that affection could do.
She could not think of Darcy's leaving Kent without remembering that his cousin was to go with him, but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear that he had no intentions at all, and, agreeable as he was, she did not mean to be unhappy about him.
While settling this point she was suddenly roused by the sound of the door-bell, and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her.
But this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently affected when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the room.
In an hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better.
She answered him with cold civility.
He sat down for a few moments, and then, getting up, walked about the room.
Elizabeth was surprised, but said not a word.
After a silence of several minutes he came towards her in an agitated manner, and thus began.
Elizabeth's astonishment was beyond expression.
She stared, coloured, doubted, and was silent.
This he considered sufficient encouragement, and the avowal of all that he felt, and had long felt for her, immediately followed.
He spoke well, but there were feelings besides those of the heart to be detailed, and he was not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride.
His sense of her inferiority, of its being a degradation, of the family obstacles which had always opposed to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to the consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his suit.
In spite of her deeply rooted dislike, she could not be insensible to the compliment of such a man's affection, and though her intentions did not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to receive, till, roused to resentment by his subsequent language, she lost all compassion in anger.
She tried, however, to compose herself to answer him with patience, when he should have done.
He concluded with representing to her the strength of that attachment which, in spite of all his endeavours, he had found impossible to conquer, and with expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of his hand.
As he said this, she could easily see that he had no doubt of a favourable answer.
He spoke of apprehension and anxiety, but his countenance expressed real security.
Such a circumstance could only exasperate farther, and, when he ceased, the collar rose into her cheeks, and she said,
I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly bestowed it most unwillingly.
I am sorry to have occasioned pain to any one. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be of short duration.
The feelings which, you tell me, have long prevented the acknowledgement of your regard, can have little difficulty in overcoming it, after this explanation.
Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes fixed on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than surprise.
His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of his mind was visible in every feature.
He was struggling for the appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed himself to have attained it.
The pause was to Elizabeth's feelings dreadful. At length, with a voice of forced calmness, he said,
And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting.
I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little endeavour at civility, I am thus rejected, but it is of small importance.
I might as well inquire, replied she, why, with so evident a desire of offending and insulting me,
you chose to tell me that you liked me against your will, against your reason, and even against your character.
Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I was uncivil? But I have other provocations, you know I have.
Had not my feelings decided against you, had they been indifferent, or had they even been favourable,
do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most beloved sister?
As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour, but the emotion was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her, while she continued.
I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted there.
You dare not, you cannot deny that you have been the principle, if not the only means, of dividing them from each other,
of exposing one to the censure of the world for caprice and instability, and the other to its derision for disappointed hopes,
and involving them both in misery of the acutest kind.
She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse.
He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.
Can you deny that you have done it? she repeated.
With assumed tranquillity, he then replied,
I have no wish of denying that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your sister, or that I rejoice in my success.
Towards him I have been kinder than towards myself.
Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection, but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her.
But it is not merely this affair, she continued, on which my dislike is founded.
Long before it had taken place, my opinion of you was decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received many months ago from Mr. Wickham.
On this subject, what can you have to say, in what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself, or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?
You take an eager interest in that gentleman's concerns, said Darcy, in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.
Who that knows what his misfortunes have been can help feeling an interest in him.
His misfortunes, repeated Darcy contemptuously. Yes, his misfortunes have been great indeed.
And of your infliction, cried Elizabeth with energy, you have reduced him to his present state of poverty, comparative poverty.
You have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed for him.
You have deprived the best years of his life of that independence which was no less his due than his dessert.
You have done all this, and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt and ridicule.
And this, cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room, is your opinion of me.
This is the estimation in which you hold me. I thank you for explaining it so fully.
My faults, according to this calculation, are heavy indeed.
But perhaps, added he, stopping in his walk and turning towards her, these offences might have been overlooked,
had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design.
These bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater policy, concealed my struggles,
and flattered you into the belief of my being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination, by reason, by reflection, by everything.
But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence, nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related, they were natural and just.
Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your connections, to congratulate myself on the hope of relations whose condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?
Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment, yet she tried to the utmost to speak with composure when she said,
You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your declaration affected me in any other way,
than as it spared the concern which I might have felt in refusing you had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.
She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she continued,
You could not have made the offer of your hand in any possible way that would have tempted me to accept it.
Again his astonishment was obvious, and he looked at her with an expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on,
From the very beginning, from the first moment, I may almost say, of my acquaintance with you,
your manners, impressing me with the fullest belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain for the feelings of others,
were such as to form the groundwork of disapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike.
And I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.
You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been.
Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best wishes for your health and happiness.
And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him the next moment open the front door and quit the house.
The tumult of her mind was now painfully great. She knew not how to support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried for half an hour.
Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was increased by every review of it.
That she should receive an offer of marriage from Mr. Darcy. That he should have been in love with her for so many months.
So much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of all the objections which had made him prevent his friends marrying her sister,
and which must appear at least with equal force in his own case, was almost incredible.
It was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong an affection. But his pride, his abominable pride, his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to Jane,
his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he could not justify it, and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Mr. Wickham,
his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny, soon overcame the pity which the consideration of his attachment had for a moment excited.
She continued in very agitated reflections till the sound of Lady Catherine's carriage made her feel how unequal she was to encounter Charlotte's observation, and hurried her away to her room.
Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations which had at length closed her eyes.
She could not yet recover from the surprise of what had happened. It was impossible to think of anything else.
And totally indisposed for employment, she resolved, soon after breakfast, to indulge herself in air and exercise.
She was proceeding directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy's sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park she turned up the lane, which led farther from the Turnpike Road.
The park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one of the gates into the ground.
After walking two or three times along that part of the lane she was tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and look into the park.
The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees.
She was on the point of continuing her walk when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park.
He was moving that way, and, fearful of its being Mr. Darcy, she was directly retreating.
But the person who advanced was now near enough to see her, and, stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced her name.
She had turned away, but on hearing herself called, though in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again towards the gate.
He had by that time reached it also, and, holding out a letter, which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty composure,
I have been walking in the grove some time in the hope of meeting you. Will you do me the honor of reading that letter?
And then, with a slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight.
With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity, Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to her still increasing wonder, perceived an envelope, containing two sheets of letter paper, written quite through, in a very close hand.
The envelope itself was likewise full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was dated from Rosings, at eight o'clock in the morning, and was as follows.
Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments, or renewal of those offers, which were last night so disgusting to you.
I write without any intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten.
And the effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written and read.
You must therefore pardon the freedom with which I demand your attention. Your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I demand it of your justice.
Two offences of a very different nature, and by no means of equal magnitude, you last night laid to my charge.
The first mentioned was that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingley from your sister, and the other that I had, in defiance of various claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate prosperity, and blasted the prospects of Mr. Wickham.
Willfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect its exertion, would be a depravity to which the separation of two young persons, whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could bear no comparison.
But from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope to be in the future secured, when the following account of my actions and their motives has been read.
If, in the explanation of them which is due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity must be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd.
I had not been long in Hertfordshire before I saw, in common with others, that Bingley preferred your elder sister to any other young woman in the country.
But it was not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield that I had any apprehension of his feeling a serious attachment. I had often seen him in love before. At that ball, while I had the honour of dancing with you, I was first made acquainted by Sir William Lucas's accidental information, that Bingley's attentions to your sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage.
He spoke of it as a certain event, of which the time alone could be undecided. From that moment I observed my friend's behaviour attentively, and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss Bennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed in him. Your sister I also watched.
Her look and manners were open, cheerful, and engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained convinced from the evening's scrutiny that though she received his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation of sentiment.
If you have not been mistaken here, I must have been in error. Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter probable. If it be so, if I have been misled by such error to inflict pain on her, your resentment has not been unreasonable.
But I shall not scruple to assert that the serenity of your sister's countenance and air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction that, however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be easily touched.
That I was desirous of believing her indifferent is certain, but I will venture to say that my investigation and decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears.
I did not believe her to be indifferent because I wished it. I believed it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My objections to the marriage were not merely those which I last night acknowledged to have the utmost force of passion to put aside, in my own case.
The want of connexion could not be so great and evil to my friend as to me. But there were other causes of repugnance, causes which, though still existing, and existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before me.
These causes must be stated, though briefly.
The situation of your mother's family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison to that total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed by herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by your father.
Pardon me, it pains me to offend you, but amidst your concern for the defects of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider that, to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure, is praise no less generally bestowed on you and your elder sister, than it is honourable to the sense and disposition of both.
I will only say farther, that from what passed that evening, my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and every inducement heightened which could have led me before to preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy connexion.
He left Netherfield for London on the day following, as you I am certain remember, with the design of soon returning.
The part which I acted is now to be explained. His sister's uneasiness had been equally excited with my own. Our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered, and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost in detaching their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly in London.
We accordingly went, and there I readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice. I described, and enforced them earnestly.
But, however this remonstrance might have staggered or delayed his determination, I do not suppose that it would ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not been seconded by the assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of your sister's indifference.
He had before believed her to return his affection with sincere, if not with equal regard. But Bingley has great natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgment than on his own.
To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself was no very difficult point. To persuade him against returning into Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been given, was scarcely the work of a moment.
I cannot blame myself for having done thus much. There is but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do not reflect with satisfaction. It is that I condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to conceal from him your sister's being in town.
I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss Bingley, but her brother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might have met without ill consequence is perhaps probable, but his regard did not appear to me enough extinguished for him to see her without some danger.
Perhaps this concealment, this disguise, was beneath me. It is done, however, and it was done for the best. On this subject I have nothing more to say, no other apology to offer. If I have wounded your sister's feelings, it was unknowingly done, and though the motives which governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient, I have not yet learnt to condemn them.
With respect to that other, more weighty accusation of having injured Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you the whole of his connection with my family. Of what he has particularly accused me I am ignorant, but of the truth of what I shall relate I can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity.
Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for many years the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose good conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father to be of service to him. And on George Wickham, who was his godson, his kindness was therefore liberally bestowed.
My father supported him at school, and afterwards at Cambridge, most important assistance, as his own father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would have been unable to give him a gentleman's education.
My father was not only fond of this young man's society, whose manners were always engaging, he had also the highest opinion of him, and, hoping the church would be his profession, intended to provide for him in it.
As for myself, it is many, many years since I first began to think of him in a very different manner.
The vicious propensities, the want of principle, which he was careful to guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself, and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Mr. Darcy could not have.
Here again I shall give you pain, to what degree you only can tell. But, whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham has created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding his real character. It adds even another motive.
My excellent father died about five years ago, and his attachment to Mr. Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will he particularly recommended it to me, to promote his advancement in the best manner that his profession might allow, and, if he took orders, desired that a valuable family living might be his as soon as it became vacant.
There was also a legacy of one thousand pounds. His own father did not long survive mine, and within half a year from these events Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against taking orders, he hoped I should not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment by which he could not be benefited.
He had some intention, he added, of studying law, and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very insufficient support therein.
I rather wished than believed him to be sincere, but at any rate was perfectly ready to accede to his proposal. I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman. The business was therefore soon settled. He resigned all claim to assistance in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to receive it, and accepted in return three thousand pounds.
All connection between us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite him to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. In town I believe he chiefly lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretense, and being now free from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and dissipation.
For about three years I heard little of him, but on the decease of the incumbent of the living which had been designed for him, he applied to me again by letter for the presentation. His circumstances, he assured me, and I had no difficulty in believing it, were exceedingly bad.
He had found the law a most unprofitable study, and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained, if I would present him to the living in question, of which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was well assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could not have forgotten my revered father's intentions.
You will hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for resisting every repetition to it. His resentment was in proportion to the distress of his circumstances, and he was doubtless as violent in his abuse of me to others as in his reproaches to myself.
After this period every appearance of acquaintance was dropped. How he lived I know not, but last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.
I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfold to any human being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of your secrecy.
My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left to the guardianship of my mother's nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself.
About a year ago she was taken from school, and an establishment formed for her in London, and last summer she went with the lady who presided over it to Ramsgate, and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by design, for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between him and Mrs. Young, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived.
And by her connivance and aid he so far recommended himself to Georgiana, whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness to her as a child, that she was persuaded to believe herself in love, and to consent to an elopement.
She was then but fifteen, which must be her excuse, and after stating her imprudence I am happy to add that I owed the knowledge of it to herself.
I joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the intended elopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as a father, acknowledged the whole to me.
You may imagine what I felt and how I acted.
Regard for my sister's credit and feelings prevented any public exposure, but I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left the place immediately, and Mrs. Young was of course removed from her charge.
Mr. Wickham's chief object was unquestionably my sister's fortune, which is thirty thousand pounds, but I cannot help supposing that the hope of revenging himself on me was a strong inducement.
His revenge would have been complete, indeed.
This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we have been concerned together, and if you do not absolutely reject it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards Mr. Wickham.
I know not in what manner, under what form of falsehood he has imposed on you, but his success is not perhaps to be wondered at.
Ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning either, detection could not be in your power, and suspicions certainly not in your inclination.
You may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last night, but I was not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought to be revealed.
For the truth of everything here related, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant intimacy, and still more as one of the executors of my father's will, has been unavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions.
If your abhorrence of me should make my assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented by the same cause from confiding in my cousin, and that there may be the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour to find some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of the morning.
I will only add, God bless you.
Fitzwilliam Darcy